[Music]
check it out did you know there are more
living things on an inside your body
alone than on the entire earth and the
world is full of this micro stuff want
to know more about how huge our planet
really is then let's look through my
super powerful microscope well start
with things you can see with your own
eyes though and the first one is a
bacterium I know I was surprised too
it's obviously the largest bacterium in
the world and it lives in the coastal
waters of Namibia its length is
three-quarters of a millimeter and it's
larger than say a grain of sand or salt
so yeah you can even touch it
more than half as small is a dust mite
these pests that bug you at night only
grow to be around a third of a
millimeter they're large enough to be
seen but you still can't do that because
they're translucent grubs by the way
remember those amoebas from your biology
classes well they're the same size or
sometimes even twice as big as dust
mites for a single-cell organism that's
huge going a bit further and here it is
your hair a single strand of human hair
is just one tenth of a millimeter thick
or should I say thin at this point and
it's the smallest object that you can
see without using a microscope at ten
and seven micrometers you'll find white
and red blood cells respectively these
cells are of utter importance to our
bodies white ones fight various diseases
while the Reds transport useful stuff
throughout the whole blood system to
things that are similar in size and you
won't believe it
a clay particle and an e.coli microbe
and they're both two micrometers in
diameter this tiny size explains why
clay doesn't let water through it the
distance between his particles is just
too small and they cling together ecoli
in its turn is a bacterium that lives in
your gut and produces vitamin K
now a little further we meet the largest
virus it's called mega virus and it's
just 440 nanometers in size just imagine
how small are the rest if this guy is
the biggest of them all oh boy I think
it's about to attack us let's go quick
whew we made it okay going further again
200 nanometers is the size of another
virus called a bacteriophage if you
translate its name from Greek you'll
find out that it feeds on bacteria this
little guy looks like a tiny robot
spider of sorts don't you think at the
same time bacteriophage are the smallest
things you can see through an optical
microscope so everything else we've got
today can only be observed with an
electron one pushing harder we go down
to three nanometers which is the width
of a DNA strand that's right I'm talking
about the DNA that contains just about
all information about virtually all
living things on earth don't let its
width fool you though the length of its
strands is simply enormous suffice it to
say that a single cell of human body
holds about 10 feet of DNA smaller still
there's a molecule of water at 280 Pico
meters when Pico meter is one billionth
of a millimeter by the way
h2o means there are two atoms of
hydrogen and one of oxygen which binds
them together and makes the molecule
look like Mickey Mouse hydrogen atoms in
their turn are just 31 Pico meters in
diameter and they're the most frequently
met atoms in the world
they consist of just two elements one
positively charged proton and one
negatively charged electron orbiting
around it
speaking about electrons these buddies
haven't been properly measured since
they're just too small for that anyway
though the classical model of
measurement says an electron is about
five centimeters in size that is five
trillions of a millimeter compared to an
atom it belongs to it's about a milli
times smaller but it depends on an atom
if you think however that electrons are
small then how about this
protons and neutrons the other two main
parts of an atom are five times smaller
than electrons
unlike electrons though which revolve
around the atoms core or nucleus they're
found within it giving it a charge and a
mass now be careful from here we're
going into the unknown and unproved
we're now at the size of 100 atom eaters
where a nanometer is 1 quadrillion of a
millimeter and even saying it makes me
wonder if not stumble over the syllables
anything that's smaller than this can't
be measured with any degree of accuracy
so the sizes of the stuff we're going to
see are very very approximate or even
hypothetic
[Music]
and the first weird things we see down
there are up and down quarks they're
both about one at a meter in size and
they're the lightest of the six types of
quarks I guess I should explain a quark
is a particle that makes up protons and
neutrons in an atoms core like I said
there are six types of them and they all
have different properties these two
little guys for example give the atom
it's positive or negative charge can you
guess which gives what let me know down
in the comments anyway further still at
400 Zetas meters just add another part
per thousand to what we already had we
meet a strange quark it's a third type
and its name is well-deserved it's about
half as small as the up and down quarks
yet it's 50 times as heavy kind of like
neutron stars that can be the size of a
city yet way more than the Sun anyway
scientists aren't sure strange quarks
can even exist in our world and they can
only appear theoretically if an atom is
squashed hard enough to break up into
quarks I know this is mind-boggling but
bear with me this isn't all yet at 100
Zepto meters we see charm quarks they're
even more massive than strange ones but
at least their existence is not
questioned they're known to have a
positive charge and they were found in
experience with the big Hedren collider
in fact they were discovered in
subatomic particles such as well-known
protons and neutrons but even though
charm quarks are extremely small their
discovery led to a whole lot of
scientific breakthroughs next up our
bottom quarks with the size of just 30 s
up to metres not a lot can be said about
these tiny guys they have a negative
charge and they quickly transform and do
other bigger types of quarks and finally
the sixth type is top quarks
their size is 100 Yocto meters yet
another part per thousand added and
against all logic they're the most
massive of all quarks just think they're
100,000 times heavier than up quarks no
wonder they're called top by the way
their other name is truth quarks
whatever that means anyway although
their existence has been experimentally
proved scientists have also found that
they can only exist for a tiny fraction
of a second so sad and even that's not
the end of it and there are particles
even smaller than top quarks one of them
is a neutrino measuring about one Yocto
meter neutrinos have no charge of their
own and they're almost not affected by
any of the fundamental forces of the
world they fly at high speeds and pass
through all kinds of matter as if it
doesn't exist even you and me right at
this moment no you can't see them not
even the most powerful microscope in the
universe so no need to get paranoid
about them passing through your body
you'll never feel them I'd be more
worried about that double bacon
cheeseburger passing through your body
and finally we're at the bottom of all
creation the quantum realm here it's
size is so small you can't even compare
them to any known measurement units
there are only two things and those are
theoretical at best one is called a
string and you might have heard about it
in sci-fi movies the string theory
suggests lots of possibilities and one
of those is that a string is
one-dimensional itself but it's
vibrations take it to all the other
dimensions scientists also argue that
all particles are strings - but I won't
bother you with too much detail on that
if you don't mind and the second thing
on this level is believed to be quantum
foam it exists according to another
theory and it makes up the whole
space-time still once again it's never
been proved that it
actually is somewhere in the world so
who knows maybe there's something else
entirely that the universe consists of
both these matters can only be measured
with the unit called Planck length I
won't bug you with the scientific stuff
and just to say its infant Tessa Mele
small Planck length was created
specifically to measure theoretical
things such as strings and quantum fault
so no wonder it's so tiny I guess
everything must have its measure right
well now there's nothing smaller than
the place we are at now except for my
attention span so let's get back to the
world of big things hey if you learn
something new today then give the video
a like and share it with a friend and
here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life